Now let's go ahead and implement our example with the simple counter on the blog post page that will
display the amount of users currently on the page.
So as I said we'll use sessions to keep track of the users.
So the first thing we have to do is read the current user session I.D. we can do that using the session
function helper and it will return an object from which we can call get I.D. to get the current user
session now will define two variables that counter key and users key so those who would be the cache
keys from which we will then read and store the counter.
So how many users on the page and this key would be used to fetch and store the information about the
users that visit that the page.
So let's give them some names so it can be blog post.
We'll use the blog post.
So each blog post has an unique key name.
This can be called counter and then this would be blog post
users
now will need the user's variable to which will read directly from the cache the contents of the user's
key.
So as I've said this would be an array where the key would be the session I.D. and the value would be
the last visit that time.
Now will also create a new variable called users update.
This would be an empty array and we'll put into this array all the users that should stay on that list
that are not expired.
Now the next variable would be called difference.
This is initially set as 0 as will use this variable inside this step.
So we already have this first step.
We are reading the users that were on the page from the cache and then inside this loop where we will
check if someone has been expired will actually modify this difference to update the counter.
It will also be used later in the example when the user was not on the list or the user was on the list
but was expired.
So on this step even the user that is active on the page but have hasn't visited it for a minute could
be removed.
So the difference variable would be decreased.
So in this cases it would be also increased.
We'll see that in a second.
So now let's iterate over the users so we'll use for each and the key in this example would be the session
and the value from an array element would be the last.
Visit time now we can also add another variable called now inside which will store their current time
using the now helper.
This will create a new instance of the carbon object.
Now let's go to the condition.
So what we will do is we will check if now which is the current date diff in minutes
from the last visit
so if the difference between now and the last visit or of a particular user is equal or more than one
minute will decrease the difference a variable.
So then this would be used to update the actual counter.
Otherwise we will add this element to the user's update so we'll keep the user by his session key.
That's actually a session and his last visit time.
So basically what that what that does is described inside this diagram.
First we have the list of the users that we saved previously.
If the user is expired then we remove him from the list and decrease their counter to be updated.
Otherwise we keep him on the list.
That would be then stored in the cache.
The next step would be to check if the current user was not on the list of the users that we have fetched
from the cache so we'll add an if statement and will verify using our ie key exists
whether the session I.D. was on the user's array so actually we want to check for false so whether it
wasn't on the users array.
Now if it wasn't we would like to increment the difference which would be the value will later modify
the counter by because why we do that is if the user wasn't on the last visit at least users then we
know that he is a fresh user but there might be also another scenario where user the current user was
on that list but he was removed because his last visit was more than one minute ago.
So let's also check for this condition.
So will do or now diff in minutes.
And we will verify the user
last visit time by checking if it is bigger or equal one.
Now the next thing we need to do is on the users update.
We need to set the actual visit time of the current user.
So for his session I.D. will set the value to be now so that way we make sure that we update the current
user last visit.
Time now will store that inside the cash.
So we have our user scheme that we have first read in this place and now it is the time to update it.
So we'll do cash put and we can do that without specifying for how long.
We want to store it because we want to store it indefinitely.
Or alternatively you can use the forever method which does the same as using put but without the expiration
time.
So the key name is user skin
so user is key and the value would be.
Users update.
So now inside the array will have an updated up to date and most fresh list of all the users and their
last visit time.
Now I've noticed that I've made a mistake.
This is already a variable also not a function call.
OK.
So this should be just using the now variable which already contains a current date.
Now the next thing we'll do is we'll use cash increment to modify the integer counter which we have
under the counter key so let's copy the variable name and what we are doing is we are doing a trick
because the difference most often and probably most often would be negative because we decree amended
to remove the users that are no longer on the page.
We only incremented in case if the user is the user that hasn't visited this page in the last minute
by.
But we can anyway use increment and if you will provide a negative value it will just decrease the counter.
Now also you should know about the increment method is that if this key won't exist it will automatically
assume it is zero and incremented to 1.
But what we can also do to use all the methods that we have learned is we can add an if statement and
check if this item actually exists so if the counter key already exists or maybe you will first check
if it doesn't exist.
So if this item doesn't exist inside the cache will do cache forever as we want to store it forever
we don't want it to expire counter Key will set it as one because this makes sense if we are the first
user on that page.
So the counter wasn't saved before then.
It means it can be said us one and now.
Otherwise if it already existed then we will do cache increment.
This way we'll use all the methods.
In this example.
Now finally we can do cash get
and use the same counter key.
Now we don't have to provide a default value because at this point we are sure that this exists because
we have save it.
If it wouldn't exist.
Now since we are currently working on files this won't be as fast as it could be.
But then in the next lectures we'll move and I will show you an example with Redis.
So that way you don't have to worry about saving and reading because this would be actually pretty fast.
So now this is the final step.
We are reading the final counter through the cash get and then we are passing it to the view to show
the amount of users currently on the page.
Now finally let's verify if this actually works.
So refresh this page and you should see that this is being read by 1 people.
Now if you refresh further our algorithm prevents this counter to be increased because your session
I.D. is being stored in inside a different key on the cache with the with the time and date of your
last visit.
Now to verify it let's copy this address and open a new incognito window.
And now you will see that it is being read by two people.
Now you might also notice that refreshing this page doesn't do anything and the counter stays up to
people now to actually test that.
You will now have to wait one minute.
And if you will keep refreshing this page then after about one minute this first user that has visited
this page would be removed from the list and then you will see here that it is currently read by one
people
now I've waited a little bit and to refresh this page and now you can see that it is being read by one
person which is this window.
So this session is active.
So the guy that visits that this page was removed.
But if he will refresh the page he will be added back to the list.
And then you will see that it is being visited by two people if you will refresh this window.
This would also be updated and reflected here.
And each time they visit they last visit that date is also updated so that was very simple example of
how you can use they use the catch mechanism not only for caching intermediate data that you just don't
want to read from the database or any other place where it will take more time to fetch.
You can also use it as data storage in its own right.